tataśca vṛndāvanato'tidūrato
vanaṃ gatastvaṃ khalu gopagokulai: |
hṛdantare bhaktataradvijāṅganā-
kadambakānugrahaṇāgrahaṃ vahan ||1||
tata:-ca	and then
vṛndāvanata:-	from Vrindaavana
atidūrata:	far away
vanaṃ gata:-tvaṃ	(when) to the forest went Thou
khalu gopa-gokulai:	indeed (with) the cowherds and cows
hṛdantare	in (Thy) heart
bhaktatara-	(to) the very devoted
dvijāṅganā:-	Braahmin women
kadambaka-	group
anugrahaṇa-	blessing
āgrahaṃ vahan	desire carrying
Once Thou went into the forest far away from Vrindaavana, with the cows and the cowherds. In Thy heart Thou carried the desire of blessing the large group of the very devout Braahmin women.
tato nirīkṣyāśaraṇe vanāntare
kiśoralokaṃ kṣudhitaṃ tṛṣākulam |
adūrato yajñaparān dvijān prati
vyasarjayo dīdiviyācanāya tān ||2||
tata: nirīkṣya-	then seeing
aśaraṇe vanāntare	without shelter, inside the forest
kiśora-lokaṃ	the boys
kṣudhitaṃ tṛṣā-ākulaṃ	hungry (and) with thirst tormented
adūrata:	not very far away
yajñaparān	performing yagya
dvijān prati	Braahmins towards
vyasarjaya:	sent
dīdivi-yācanāya	boiled rice to beg
tān	of them
Then Thou saw that the boys were hungry and were tormented by thirst and the forest was without any dwellings where some food could be got. Not very far away some Braahmins were performing Yagya. Thou sent the boys to them to beg for some boiled rice (food).
gateṣvatho teṣvabhidhāya te'bhidhāṃ
kumārakeṣvodanayāciṣu prabho |
śrutisthirā apyabhininyuraśrutiṃ
na kiñcidūcuśca mahīsurottamā: ||3||
gateṣu-atha: teṣu-	they had gone ,then they
abhidhāya	mentioning
te-abhidhāṃ	Thy name
kumārakeṣu-	the boys
odana-yāciṣu	for food had asked
prabho	O Lord!
śruti-sthirā api-	(they) in Srutis firmly established even (though)
abhininyu:-aśrutiṃ	took to not hearing
na kiñcit-	anything
ūcu:-ca	said and
mahīsura-uttamā:	(they known to be) the Braahmins great
O Lord! The boys then went to the Braahmins and they mentioned Thy name and asked for food. But the great Braahmins who were known to be well versed in Vedas (Shrutis) acted as if they had not heard anything and did not respond in any manner.
anādarāt khinnadhiyo hi bālakā: |
samāyayuryuktamidaṃ hi yajvasu |
cirādabhaktā: khalu te mahīsurā:
kathaṃ hi bhaktaṃ tvayi tai: samarpyate ||4||
anādarāt	ignored
khinnadhiya:	sad at heart
hi bālakā:	indeed the boys
samāyayu:-	came back
yuktam-idaṃ hi	befitting this (behaviour) indeed
yajvasu	for ritualists
cirāt-abhaktā:	for long being undevoted
khalu te mahīsurā:	indeed they the Braahmins
kathaṃ hi	how indeed
bhaktaṃ tvayi	food to Thee
tai: samarpyate	by them be offered
The boys came back, saddened at heart at being ignored thus. But such an indifferent behaviour was quite expected of such ritualistic Braahmins. Indeed for long they were not devoted to Thee so how was it possible that they would offer food to Thee?
nivedayadhvaṃ gṛhiṇījanāya māṃ
diśeyurannaṃ karuṇākulā imā: |
iti smitārdraṃ bhavateritā gatā-
ste dārakā dārajanaṃ yayācire ||5||
nivedayadhvaṃ	announce
gṛhiṇījanāya	to the housewives
mām	me
diśeyu:-annaṃ	will give food
karuṇākulā:-imā:	compassion driven these (women)
iti smita-ārdram	thus smiling softly
bhavatā-īritā:	by Thee being said
gatā:-te dārakā:	went they (those) boys
dārajanaṃ yayācire	the wives requested
Thou told the boys to go and announce Thy arrival to the housewives. Thou smilingly told them that those women were full of compassion and that they would give food. Thus being told the boys went to the housewives and requested them.
gṛhītanāmni tvayi sambhramākulā-
ścaturvidhaṃ bhojyarasaṃ pragṛhya tā: |
ciraṃdhṛtatvatpravilokanāgrahā:
svakairniruddhā api tūrṇamāyayu: ||6||
gṛhīta-nāmni tvayi	(when) Thy name was taken
sambhrama-ākulā:-	in great excitement (and) who were eager (to see Thee)
caturvidhaṃ bhojya-rasaṃ	four types of food
pragṛhya-tā:	taking they
ciraṃ-dhṛta-tvat-	for long holding Thy
pravilokana-āgrahā:	sight's desire
svakai:-niruddhā: api	by kith and kin being prevented even
tūrṇam-āyayu:	quickly came
As Thy name was mentioned by the boys, the women who were eager to see Thee were very excited. They quickly came to Thee carrying with them four types food. For long they were holding a desire to see Thee, so in spite of being forbidden by their kith and kin, they came quickly.
vilolapiñchaṃ cikure kapolayo:
samullasatkuṇḍalamārdramīkṣite |
nidhāya bāhuṃ suhṛdaṃsasīmani
sthitaṃ bhavantaṃ samalokayanta tā: ||7||
vilola-piñchaṃ	quivering peacock feather
cikure kapolayo:	in the hair, on the two cheeks
samullasat-	glowing
kuṇḍalam-	earrings
ārdram-īkṣite	kindly glance
nidhāya bāhuṃ	placing hand
suhṛt-aṃsa-sīmani	on friend's shoulder
sthitaṃ bhavantaṃ	standing (thus) Thee
samalokayanta tā:	joyfully saw they (the women)
The peacock feather was quivering in the locks of Thy hair. Thy two cheeks were glowing with the reflection of the earrings. Thy hand was placed on the shoulder of Thy friend. The women joyfully saw Thee standing in this manner in front of them.
tadā ca kācittvadupāgamodyatā
gṛhītahastā dayitena yajvanā |
tadaiva sañcintya bhavantamañjasā
viveśa kaivalyamaho kṛtinyasau ||8||
tadā ca kācit-	and then one of them
tvat-upāgama-	Thee coming near to
udyatā gṛhīta-hastā	eager, caught by the hand
dayitena yajvanā	by (her) husband (who was) a ritualistic Braahmin
tadā-eva	then only
sañcintya	meditated deeply
bhavantam-añjasā	on Thee, easily
viveśa kaivalyam-	entered oneness (with Thee)
aho	what a wonder
kṛtinī-asau	very fortunate (was) this one
And then, one of them who was eager to come near Thee, was held back by hand by her ritualistic husband. Thus being deterred, she meditated deeply on Thee. O What a wonder! This fortunate one easily entered oneness with Thee, there and then.
ādāya bhojyānyanugṛhya tā: puna-
stvadaṅgasaṅgaspṛhayojjhatīrgṛham |
vilokya yajñāya visarjayannimā-
ścakartha bhartṛnapi tāsvagarhaṇān ||9||
ādāya bhojyāni-	taking food offerings
anugṛhya tā:	blessing them (the women)
puna:	again
tvat-aṅga-	Thy physical
saṅga-spṛhayā-	contact desiring
ujjhatī: gṛham	(and so) abandoning the house
vilokya yajñāya	seeing, for the rituals
visarjayan-	sending back
imā:-cakartha	these women, Thou did
bhartṛna-api	the husbands also
tāsu-agarhaṇān	in them (for their wives) had no hard feelings
Accepting their offerings for food, Thou blessed them. They were always desirous of having physical contact with Thee and so abandoned their houses. Seeing this, Thou sent them back to conduct the Yagya rituals properly. Thou also rendered their husbands free from any ill feelings towards them.
nirūpya doṣaṃ nijamaṅganājane
vilokya bhaktiṃ ca punarvicāribhi:
prabuddhatattvaistvamabhiṣṭuto dvijai-
rmarutpurādhīśa nirundhi me gadān ||10||
nirūpya	realising
doṣaṃ nijam-	mistake (their) own
aṅganājane	(and) in the women folk
vilokya bhaktiṃ	seeing devotion
ca puna:-	and again
vicāribhi:	by the thinking ones
prabuddha-tattvai:-	who had understood the reality
tvam-abhiṣṭuta:	Thou were praised
dvijai:-	by the Braahmins
marutpurādhīśa	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
nirundhi me gadān	eradicate my sufferings
The Braahmins realized their own mistake. They also recognized the great devotion of their wives. Those of them who reflected thus and then understood the Reality sang Thy praises. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Eradicate my sufferings.